Course: Coursera - Data Science Specialization
Course project: Getting and Cleaning Data
Course  participant: Mirjam Hachem

CODEBOOK

This is the codebook that belongs to the uploaded dataset contained
in the file TidyDataExtract.txt

Find the R script that creates this dataset here:
Find the README file for the R script here: 

PLEASE NOTE: 
From the description of the assignment, it was not clear to me
whether the the tasks 3 to 5 have to be executed to the dataset 
created in 1 or the dataset extracted in 2. I therefore
applied all the operations to both datasets. I therefore
uploaded the dataset extracted in task two and stored the dataset created
in task 1 in TidyDataComplete.txt which you can find in the same
GitHub repository. 


0. DESCRIPTION OF THE ORIGINAL DATASET

The present data set is based on the "Human activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset". 

Here follows a description of the original study copied from the README file of this dataset.

Authors:
Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova.
Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
www.smartlab.ws

Experiments:
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

For each record it is provided:
- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
- Its activity label. 
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

The dataset includes the following files:
- 'README.txt'
- 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.
- 'features.txt': List of all features.
- 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.
- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.
- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.
- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.
- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.


1. DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT DATASET

The dataset "TidyDataExctract" is the result of applying the following operations to the "Human activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset"
	
	1. Merging the trainig and the test set to create one dataset
	2. Extracting the measurements of the mean and the standard deviation for 
	   each measurement.
	3. Replacing the numbers given for each activity in the merged set with
	   descriptive activity names provided in the activity_labels.txt file.
	4. Adjusting the variable names in the dataset to more descriptive variable
	   names.
	5. Creating a second independent tidy dataset with the average of
	   each variable for each activity and each subject.

The "TidyDataExtract" dataset therefore contains the values resulting 
from calculating the mean for each variable for each activity and each
subject.


2. VARIABLE MEANINGS

The variable names in the dataset "TidyDataExtract" are composites of the following components:

X, Y, Z = denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y, and Z directions

time = time of measurement
frequency = frequency of measurement

Body = body movement, appears dubble in some variables
Gravity = acceleration of gravity
Jerk = sudden movement acceleration
Accelerometer = measurement of accelerometer
Gyroscope = measurement of gyroscope
Magnitude = magnitude of movement

sd = standard deviation
mean = mean
mad = median absolute deviation
max = largest value in array
min = smallest value in array
sma = signal magnitude area
iqr = interquartile range


The following components only appear in the dataset stored in TidyDataComplete.txt in addition to the components given above

autoregressiveCoefficients = autoregressive coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
maxIndex = index of the frequency componen with largest magnitude
meanFreqency = weigted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
intervalEnergy = energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window
energy = energy measure, sum of the squares divided by the number of values
entropy = signal entropy
correlation = correlation coefficient between the two signals
skewness = skewness of the frequency domain signal
kurtosis = kurtosis of the requency domain signal
angle = angle between two vectors


3. LICENSE: 

The use of the dataset "Human activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset" must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication: 

Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

The dataset "Human activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset" is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.


Thank you for grading my assignment :-)